# Zen and Computers

As a computer programmer in a Zen sangha, I sometimes feel a little
apologetic---a kind of discord or contrast.  This is a personal
feeling of mine, starting before I met any other Zen practitioners,
who actually often turn out to be IT professionals themselves, or in
any case to be sympathetic and to some agree affected themselves.
There is certainly no animosity, though from a certain conventional
perspective it's surprising to have an activity where "engineers" and
"artists" are equally active.  I've been thinking about this perceived
contrast, and I think it's actually quite interesting.  My hope is to
expand a little on this felt tension, from the standpoint of a
computer programmer, in a way that's accessible to "laymen"---to use
an ironic term from technical manuals.  The basic theme I'm trying to
explore is Zen and computers as having to do with concepts and the
relation between concepts and reality.

## Contrast

It's not a stretch to claim that the increasing media coverage of
things like meditation, Zen, mindfulness, and so on, is related to the
rise of computers, and especially the internet.  The smartphone is an
important and demonstrative object in a wider discussion about our use
of technology in which a key idea is mental health.  We talk about the
accelerating pace of information, the bizarre consequences of
algorithmic trading, and declining attention spans.  We try to become
free from clutter, we protest against the onslaught of email, we
bemoan the constant distraction of devices.  Our culture is
increasingly computerized, and it's clear to everyone that this is an
enormous change, in some ways quite scary.  Perhaps without the
buzzing presence of computers in our mental landscapes, we would have
less need for meditative techniques to "purify the mind," or perhaps
zazen would just be a lot easier.

Many computer professionals are sympathetic to this cautious approach
to technology.  In fact, quite a few have corresponding interests in
for example hiking, ecology, and indeed, Zen.  My own engagement with
Zen started as a kind of corrective to the way I felt my mind being
affected by technology and internet culture.  I had spent many years
absorbed in it.  My basic desires were shaped by it.  I wanted
to understand the world through information, concepts, and structure.
Moreover, the world was obviously buggy, unfinished, and senseless, so
I wanted to fix it.  Programmers are prone to a kind of Platonic
perfectionism: a chronic dissatisfaction with the irrationality,
inefficiency, and arbitrariness of the human world, even the cosmos
itself.  To this kind of mentality, instructions to "just breathe"
seemed in one way useless and ludicrous, but in another way
intriguingly intimate and somehow pure.

## Chopping Reality, Hauling Concepts

Programmers often run into the difficulty of conceptual
representation.  One of the vocational bugaboos is what's called the
"leaky abstraction," basically a concept that fails to capture the
full reality.  Take for example the common representation of human
gender as a binary value: man/woman.  Adding to the conservative
naïvete of the duality itself, one might also be required to define,
just as a matter of engineering, which is 1 and which is 0---which
gender is assigned to be "true" and which is "false."  Of course, no
programmer would take this as a serious idea, but it shows the
rigidity of digital concepts.  Even numbers are imperfect: in many
programming languages, you can only count up to about four billion
before the memory cell "wraps around" back to zero.

As the saying goes, "all abstractions are leaky."  This is a daily
experience for any programmer.  We constantly run into the limitations
of our languages and our conceptual schemes.  It's a major explanation
for why most computer software is "buggy": there's a disconnect
between the conceptual layer of code and the rest of the world,
including the world of operating systems, the world of computer
hardware, the world of user interaction, and the enormous variety of
worlds with which we interact using computers, such as science,
economical worlds, work, people, and society in general.  This is
similar to the difficulties of government and law.  And it makes me
think of the relationship between rural Ch'an and the urban world of
Confucian scholars and imperial bureaucrats.

In old Ch'an tales, temples and monasteries are often visited by
curious bureaucrats of the Chinese empire.  Often they are subtly
ridiculed, but sometimes they become disciples.  Sometimes I ponder a
comparison between these and modern "employees."  We programmers are
similar to scholars, lawyers, and others in that we deal primarily
with concepts.  This could be extended to politicians,
psychotherapists, and others who do "intellectual labor."  The myth of
the misty mountain where the Zen master chops wood and hauls water is
like a perfectly established counterpoint to the city of digital
commerce and scholarly abstraction.  In order to make some sense of my
own life, I no longer see this as a dissonance, but instead as
appropriate and beautiful.  There's a kind of psychological affinity
between the nerd and the monk.  Maybe we aren't alien to Zen, but part
of it's *raison d'être*.

## Zen and Hacking

There are, actually, in the annals of computing folklore, many
explicit references to Zen and Daoism.  For example, there is a
collection of so-called "koans" where instead of a Ch'an master and
monk, you might find the legendary AI researcher Marvin Minsky making
some enigmatic point about artificial neural networks to a baffled
student.  There's the idea that only neophytes debug tricky routines
by rational thought; true masters solve problems by intuition or
meditation, and clean solutions appear in the manner of *satori*, when
the mind is clear of obstructing ideas and in tune with the way of the
system.  In the famous text by Eric S. Raymond, *How to be a Hacker*,
there's a bullet list of suggested extracurricular activities that
includes---no kidding---zazen.

Much of this impulse can be traced back to when hackers in places like
Berkeley, California were merrily inventing the basic technologies of
the internet while immersed in the countercultural atmosphere of the
early seventies.  There's been a lot written about the countercultural
content of early computing and especially the early stages of personal
computing and networking.  One important event was the publication of
Pirsig's *Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance*, an enduring
classic of its era.  I previously used the distinction between
"engineers" and "artists," and this is one of the primary themes that
Pirsig's exploration dealt with.  He builds up toward a grand idea of
"Quality," a shot at unifying aesthetics, ethics, and metaphysics, and
one step along the way---the first step---is an attempt to be more
nuanced about the distinction between engineering and art, or
actually, since the book is partly a biographical travelogue, an
attempt to harmonize between his own technologically tinkering
personality and the tech-fearing aspects of some of his friends.

